# Getting Started

This Getting_Started.md file was written as a quick-start guide to using TESP, specifically for DSO+T.

## What you will need (as a windows user)

- mobaxterm: https://mobaxterm.mobatek.net/
	- Download and install
- vscode (code): 
	- Install from the command line in mobaxterm: 
		- `sudo apt install snapd`
		- `sudo snap install --classic code`
	- To launch VSCode: `code`
	- To kill sessions: `killall code`
- An ssh session of mobaxterm into one of the following computing resources:
	- Boomer, gage, graham-sim, maxwell, tapteal-ubu
		- Note that you need to request access individually.
		- Session -> new session -> user@boomer.pnl.gov
        - Enter pnnl password

## Set up an environment and install TESP

The TESP Read The Docs page walks through this process: https://tesp.readthedocs.io/en/latest/Installing_Building_TESP.html

When you've successfully completed this step, you should be able to activate the environment from your home dierctory.
Remember to activate your environment before attempting to run anything within TESP. 

Activate environment: `source tesp`


## DSO+T at a Glance

There are two main parameters used in the DSO+T study that are managed by having separate configuration files depending
on the case. The first is the number of nodes on the system. There is an 8-node case and a 200-node case. The 8-node
case is a simplified version of the ERCOT system, and is assumed to be the default case due to its faster simulation 
time. The second is whether the DER scenario is "business-as-usual" (BAU), or the high-renewables case. We assume a 
modified version of the high-renewables case from the DSO+T study, updated to align with present trends. The naming 
convention for DSO+T is `[node]_[scenario]_...` such that our case config file is `8_hi_system_case_config.json`, for example.  

## Where you will be working:

Directory: `TESP\examples\analysis\dsot\code`

These are the main files to edit in order to generate new runs:
- 8_hi_system_case_config.json
- generate_case.py
- prepare_case_dsot.py

Note that TESP expects python3, so any python scripts 
are run like: 

`python3 prepare_case_dsot.py`

The main files behind tesp, running the market, the agents, the substations, are located within 
`TESP/src/tesp_support/tesp_support/dsot`

## Before starting any runs, get necessary data:

Start by downloading supporting data that is not stored in the repository due to its size and static nature. This will 
add a “data” folder alongside the existing “code” folder from the repository. 

`cd tesp/repository/tesp/examples/analysis/dsot/code`

`./dsotData.sh`

## Prepare a run

Edit the following files to setup your case:
- `8_hi_system_case_config.json`
	- Market
	- Start Time
	- End Time
	- Tmax (this is the alloted time based on your simulation window. Existing definitions stored based on number of 
	days, e.g., 7Tmax for 7 days)
- `generate_case.py` (For generating a year's worth of runs, one month at a time)
	- Looks at `prepare_case_dsot.py` for most of its config
	- If attempting to generate only a selection of months, rather than the full year:

			if split_case:
				while True:
					for i in range(3,4): \\ Where months are (exclusive, inclusive)
	
	- NOTE: the naming convention for the runs generated by `generate_case.py` are `[node]_[year]_[month]_[flag(s)]` 
	such that for the 8 node case with solar, battery, electric vehicles, and flexible loads available, the January 
	case file would be `8_2016_01_pv_bt_fl_ev`.
- `prepare_case_dsot.py` (For generating a run less than a month long, with duration set in `8_hi_system_case_config.json`)
	- `"RECS_data" = True`
	- Set agent flags, pv, bt, ev, and fl to 1 or 0
	- Select whether to use 8 or 200 node test case

## Select a Rate Design

Three example rate designs are available to apply to the system. Selecting a rate is part of the case prep. Those rates are:
- The original transactive rate used for the DSO+T study
- Flat rate
- Time of Use

Each rate is described below:

### Transactive (DSO+T) Rate

The default rate design uses the DSO+T rate, by setting `"rate": ""` within the system case config file. This enrolls all
participating customers and devices in the transactive energy market. Set the DER percentages via the 
`"dsoRECSAgentFile": "rates_analysis_case_config.json"`. This file lives in the `dsot/data` directory. Those parameters are:

	"TransactiveHousePercentage": 80,
    "SolarPercentage": 11,
    "StoragePercentage": 3,
    "EVPercentage": 8,

Where `TransactiveHousePercentage` defines the percentage of households that enroll all household DER devices in the 
transactive rate. This includes water heaters and programmable thermostats. 

### Flat Rate

The flat rate is the baseline case without a transactive market with a static price sent to all customers. To enable this
rate, set `"market": false` in `8_hi_system_case_config.json`.

### Time of Use

The Time of Use, or TOU rate, uses a scheduled, time-varying price for electricity, with high and low pricing 
windows coincident with peak and off-peak pricing, respectively. To enable this rate, select `"rate": "TOU"` in 
`8_hi_system_case_config.json`. To customize the TOU rate, see `tou.py`, in `src\tesp_support\tesp_support\dsot`.

TOU Options:
- Seasons
- Window timing
- Peak/Off-Peak Ratio
- Base price
- Step Size (5 min or 1 hour)

The `time_of_use_price_profile` within `tou.py` creates a year-long profile as a .csv. That profile is read as `tou_params`
to be used by the `dso_rate_making.py`.

## Shell scripts to navigate runs (execute within the generated run folder):

Once your case folder(s) have been created, to start, stop, and clean up run files, the following commands can be run 
from the terminal in mobaxterm (rather than VSCode, as sometimes they don't queue correctly). From the desired case
folder:	
- `./run.sh` : runs a run
- `./kill.sh` : kills a run
- `./clean.sh` : cleans up run files if you need to restart a killed run

## Check on Run Status

From mobaxterm command line:
- Check for errors (from the run folder):
	- `cat *.log | grep -i err`
	- `cat */*.log | grep -i err` 

- Check processes with `htop`. 
	- If very little computing power is being used, likely no runs are active. This also shows 
each process. Can be sorted by user, time, CPU%, etc.

- Check what is running with `ps -a`. 
	- Used to make sure tesp install is successful. Occasionally GridLAB-D may not install 
correctly. If it is not listed after you've executed a run, try to reinstall it.

- Check `opf.csv` and `pf.csv` file sizes.
	- Refresh case file directory and check size of `opf.csv` and `pf.csv`. These should be growing in size as
 things are written.

- Check `tso.log`.
	- After run is completed, check the `tso.log` within the case file directory for any errors. Scroll to bottom to see that it finished 
successfully or exited with an error. 
	- `tail -20 tso.log` can be used to see whether the run is still in progress, or has 
completed. The last few lines of the `tso.log` from a successful run look like:


			INFO:root:entering to_frame, filename=bus_8_2016_03_pv_bt_fl_ev_metrics.h5
			INFO:root:entering to_frame, filename=gen_8_2016_03_pv_bt_fl_ev_metrics.h5
			INFO:root:entering to_frame, filename=sys_8_2016_03_pv_bt_fl_ev_metrics.h5
			INFO:root:entering to_frame, filename=da_lmp_8_2016_03_pv_bt_fl_ev_metrics.h5
			INFO:root:entering to_frame, filename=da_line_8_2016_03_pv_bt_fl_ev_metrics.h5
			INFO:root:entering to_frame, filename=da_gen_q_8_2016_03_pv_bt_fl_ev_metrics.h5
			INFO:root:entering to_frame, filename=da_q_8_2016_03_pv_bt_fl_ev_metrics.h5
			INFO:root:entering to_frame, filename=rt_line_8_2016_03_pv_bt_fl_ev_metrics.h5
			INFO:root:entering to_frame, filename=rt_q_8_2016_03_pv_bt_fl_ev_metrics.h5
			INFO:root:breaking out at 2764800
			INFO:root:finalize metrics writing
			INFO:root:closing files
			INFO:root:finalizing HELICS tso federate

### Troubleshooting Runs

- Address already in use:
	- Are you already running something? Make sure it's finished, i.e., don't try to postprocess and run something new 
	at the same time.
- Infeasible solution/ No RT starting point:
	- `genPowerLevel` needs to be adjusted in `8_hi_system_case_config.json`
		- Defines the initial power output for generators when running the very first timestep. This allows them to be 
		put in such a state that, when respecting ramp rates, they can reach a reasonable dispatch.
		- 0.6 - 0.7 usually works, for high-demand months, might need to go up to 0.85. Low-demand months might need to go to 0.45.


## Run Post-Processing

Post-processing can be run either through the shell script, `./postprocesss.sh` or with the command:

`python3 ../run_case_postprocessing.py > postprocessing.log&`

## Move run files over to a sharefolder:

If you would like to share your results with your team or access the run files from your PC:

1. Navigate to the folder one directory above the run folder you'd like to move
2. `sudo mount -t cifs //pnnlfs09.pnl.gov/sharedata37_op$/DSOT  /mnt/dsot -o username=[USER]`
3. `sudo cp -r [run_folder] /mnt/dsot/run_outputs/Rates_Scenario/.`

*Note: instructions will change based on mount location, folder, and target directory.*

If choosing to delete run folders to clear up room, do so from the mobaxterm terminal rather than VSCode to ensure they 
are successfully cleared from the disk.